Add ML commons algorthim documentation (#597)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _ml-commons-plugin/algorithms.md

---
layout: default
title: Supported Algorithms 
has_children: false
nav_order: 100
---

# Supported Algorithms

> ML Commons supports various algorithms to help train and predict ML models or test data-driven predictions without a model. This page outlines the algorithms supported by the ML Commons plugin and the API actions they support

Reviewer: Please add period at the end of line 10.

## Common limitation

Except for the Localization algorithm, all of the following algorithms can only support retrieving 10,000 documents from an index as an input.

## K-Means

> K-Means is a simple and popular unsupervised clustering ML algorithm. K-Means will randomly choose centroids, then calculate iteratively to optimize the position of the centroids until each observation belongs to the cluster with the nearest mean.

Reviewer 2: We build K-Means on top of Tribuo library too, can you add some statement like Linear Regression ?

### Parameters

Parameter | Type   | Description | Default Value
:--- |:--- | :--- | :---
centroids | integer | The number of clusters to group the generated data | `2` 
iterations | integer | The number of iterations to perform against the data until a mean generates | `10`
distance_type | enum, such as `EUCLIDEAN`, `COSINE`, or `L1` | Type of measurement from which to measure the distance between centroids | `EUCLIDEAN`

### APIs

* [Train](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/ml-commons-plugin/api/#train-model)
* [Predict](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/ml-commons-plugin/api/#predict)
* [Train and predict](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/ml-commons-plugin/api/#train-and-predict)

### Example

> The following example uses the Iris Data index to train K-Means synchronously. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following example shows how to train the Iris Data index to do a synchronous K-Means algorithm. 
```

```json
POST /_plugins/_ml/_train/kmeans
{
    "parameters": {
        "centroids": 3,
        "iterations": 10,
        "distance_type": "COSINE"
    },
    "input_query": {
        "_source": ["petal_length_in_cm", "petal_width_in_cm"],
        "size": 10000
    },
    "input_index": [
        "iris_data"
    ]
}
```

### Limitations

> The training process supports multi-threads, but the thread number is less than half of CPUs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The training process supports multiple threads, but the thread number is less than half of CPUs.
```

> The training process supports multi-threads, but the thread number is less than half of CPUs.

Author: Switched to, "...but the number of threads should be less than half of the number of CPUs."

## Linear Regression

Linear Regression maps the linear relationship between inputs and outputs. In ml-common, the linear regression algorithm is adopted from the public machine learning library [Tribuo](https://tribuo.org/), which offers multidimensional linear regression models. The model supports the linear optimizer in training, including popular approaches like Linear Decay, SQRT_DECAY, [ADA](http://chrome-extension//gphandlahdpffmccakmbngmbjnjiiahp/https://www.jmlr.org/papers/volume12/duchi11a/duchi11a.pdf), [ADAM](https://tribuo.org/learn/4.1/javadoc/org/tribuo/math/optimisers/Adam.html), and [RMS_DROP](https://tribuo.org/learn/4.1/javadoc/org/tribuo/math/optimisers/RMSProp.html). 

### Parameters

Parameter | Type   | Description | Default Value
:--- |:--- | :--- | :---

> learningRate | Double | The rate of speed that the gradient moves during descent | 0.01

Reviewer 3: nit: put periods after each sentence

momentumFactor | Double | The medium-term from which the regressor rises or falls | 0
epsilon | Double | The criteria in which a linear model is identified | 1.00E-06 
beta1 | Double | The estimated exponential decay for the moment |  0.9
beta2 | Double | The estimated exponential decay for the moment |  0.99
decayRate | Double | The rate at which the model decays exponentially | 0.9

> momentumType | MomentumType | The momentum with SDG to help accelerate gradients vectors in the right directions, leading to a faster convergence | STANDARD

Author: SDG stands for Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), is a part of the linear regression algorithm that optimizes the regression model to find values or coefficients that minimize the cost of the function. With that in mind, @natebower and @ylwu-amzn, do you think that "The defined Stochastic Gradient Descent momentum that helps accelerate gradient vectors in the right directions, leading to a fast convergence," works here?

optimizerType | OptimizerType | The optimizer used in the model | SIMPLE_SGD

### APIs

* [Train](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/ml-commons-plugin/api/#train-model)
* [Predict](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/ml-commons-plugin/api/#predict)

### Example

> The following example predicts based on the previously trained linear regression model.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following example shows a prediction based on the previously trained linear regression model.
```

**Request**

```json
POST _plugins/_ml/_predict/LINEAR_REGRESSION/ROZs-38Br5eVE0lTsoD9
{
  "parameters": {
    "target": "price"
  },
  "input_data": {
    "column_metas": [
      {
        "name": "A",
        "column_type": "DOUBLE"
      },
      {
        "name": "B",
        "column_type": "DOUBLE"
      }
    ],
    "rows": [
      {
        "values": [
          {
            "column_type": "DOUBLE",
            "value": 3
          },
          {
            "column_type": "DOUBLE",
            "value": 5
          }
        ]
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

**Response**

```json
{
  "status": "COMPLETED",
  "prediction_result": {
    "column_metas": [
      {
        "name": "price",
        "column_type": "DOUBLE"
      }
    ],
    "rows": [
      {
        "values": [
          {
            "column_type": "DOUBLE",
            "value": 17.25701855310131
          }
        ]
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

### Limitations

> ML Commons only supports the linear Stochastic gradient trainer or optimizer, which can not effectively map the non-linear relationships in trained data. When used with complicated data sets, the linear Stochastic trainer might cause some convergence problems and inaccurate results. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
ML Commons only supports the linear Stochastic gradient trainer or optimizer, which can't effectively map the non-linear relationships in trained data. When used with complicated data sets, the linear Stochastic trainer might cause some convergence problems and inaccurate results. 
```

> ML Commons only supports the linear Stochastic gradient trainer or optimizer, which can not effectively map the non-linear relationships in trained data. When used with complicated data sets, the linear Stochastic trainer might cause some convergence problems and inaccurate results. 

Reviewer: "cannot"

## RCF

[Random Cut Forest](https://github.com/aws/random-cut-forest-by-aws) (RCF) is a probabilistic data structure used primarily for unsupervised anomaly detection. Its use also extends to density estimation and forecasting. OpenSearch leverages RCF for anomaly detection. ML Commons supports two new variants of RCF for different use cases:

> * Batch RCF: Detect anomalies in non-time-series data 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Batch RCF: Detect anomalies in non-time series data 
```

> * Fixed in time (FIT) RCF: Detect anomalies in time-series data

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Fixed in time (FIT) RCF: Detect anomalies in time series data
```

### Parameters

#### Batch RCF

Parameter | Type   | Description | Default Value
:--- |:--- | :--- | :---
number_of_trees | integer | Number of trees in the forest | 30
sample_size | integer | The same size used by the stream samplers in the forest | 256
output_after | integer | The number of points required by stream samplers before results return | 32
training_data_size | integer | The size of your training data | Data set size
anamoly_score_threshold | double | The threshold of the anomaly score | 1.0 

#### Fit RCF

Parameter | Type   | Description | Default Value
:--- |:--- | :--- | :---
number_of_trees | integer | Number of trees in the forest | 30
shingle_size | integer | A shingle, or consecutive sequence of the most recent records | 8
sample_size | integer | The sample size used by stream samplers in the forest | 256
output_after | integer | The number of points required by stream samplers before results return | 32
time_decay | double | The decay factor used by stream samplers in the forest | 0.0001 
anomaly_rate | double | The anomaly rate | 0.005

> time_field | string | (**Required**) The time filed for RCF to use as time-series data | N/A

Reviewer: "time-series data" above did not have a hyphen in row 159. Maybe @natebower can comment on which is correct?

> date_format | string | The date and time formatting for the time_field field | "yyyy-MM-ddHH:mm:ss"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
date_format | string | The date and time for the `time_field` field in yyyy-MM-ddHH:mm:ss format.  | N/A
```

> date_format | string | The date and time formatting for the time_field field | "yyyy-MM-ddHH:mm:ss"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
date_format | string | The `time_field` field date and time format.   | "yyyy-MM-ddHH:mm:ss"
```

> time_zone | string | The time zone for the time_field field | "UTC" 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
time_zone | string | The time zone for the `time_field` field | "UTC" 
```

### APIs

* [Train](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/ml-commons-plugin/api/#train-model)
* [Predict](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/ml-commons-plugin/api/#predict)
* [Train and predict](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/ml-commons-plugin/api/#train-and-predict)

### Limitations

> For FIT RCF, you can train the model with historical data, and store the trained model in your index. The model will be deserialized and predict new data points when using the Predict API. But the model in the index will not be refreshed with new data, because the model is "Fixed In Time".

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For FIT RCF, you can train the model with historical data, and store the trained model in your index. The model will be deserialized and predict new data points when using the Predict API. The model in the index will not be refreshed with new data, because the model is "Fixed In Time".
```

## Localization 

> Finding subset level information for aggregate data (for example, aggregated over time) that demonstrates the activity of interest (spikes, drops, changes, anomalies) is a critical insight. Localization can be applied in different scenarios, such as data exploration, root cause analysis, etc., to expose the contributors driving the activity of interest in the aggregate data.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Finding subset level information for aggregate data (for example, aggregated over time) that demonstrates the activity of interest (spikes, drops, changes, anomalies) is a critical insight. Localization can be applied in different scenarios, such as: data exploration or root cause analysis to expose the contributors driving the activity of interest in the aggregate data.
```

> The Localization algorithm finds subset level information for aggregate data (for example, aggregated over time) that demonstrates the activity of interest, such as spikes, drops, changes or anomalies. Localization can be applied in different scenarios, such as data exploration or root cause analysis, to expose the contributors driving the activity of interest in the aggregate data.

Reviewer: comma after changes

> The Localization algorithm finds subset level information for aggregate data (for example, aggregated over time) that demonstrates the activity of interest, such as spikes, drops, changes or anomalies. Localization can be applied in different scenarios, such as data exploration or root cause analysis, to expose the contributors driving the activity of interest in the aggregate data.

Reviewer 4: Hyphenate "subset-level information".

### Parameters

Parameter | Type   | Description | Default Value
:--- | :--- | :--- | :---
index_name | String | The data collection to analyze | N/A
attribute_field_names | List<String> | The fields for entity kets | N/A
aggregations | List<AggregationBuilder> | The fields and aggregation for values | N/A
time_field_name | String | The timestamp field | null
start_time | Long | The beginning of the time range | 0 
end_time | Long | The end of time range | 0

> min_time_interval | Long | The minimal time interval/scale for analysis | 0

Reviewer: Should it be "minimum" instead of "minimal"? Another @natebower question.

Reviewer 4: Yes, it should be "minimum".

num_outputs | integer | The maximum number of values from localization/slicing | 0
filter_query | Long | (Optional) Reduces the collection of data for analysis | Optional.empty()

> anomaly_star | QueryBuilder | (Optional) The time from which after the data will be analyzed | Optional.empty()

Reviewer: "The time after which the data will be analyzed" ?

### Limitations

> The localization algorithm can only be executed directly. Therefore, it cannot be used with the ML Common's train and predicts APIs.

Reviewer: Should "train" and "Predict" be capitalized if they are the names of APIs?

Reviewer 4: I believe so, and "Predict API" is capitalized in the next file.

> The localization algorithm can only be executed directly. Therefore, it cannot be used with the ML Common's train and predicts APIs.

Reviewer 4: Capitalize "Localization". Remove the apostrophe from "Common's". Remove the "s" from "predicts".

### Parameters

Parameter | Type   | Description | Default Value
:--- |:--- | :--- | :---
centroids | integer | The number of clusters in which to group the generated data | `2` 
iterations | integer | The number of iterations to perform against the data until a mean generates | `10`
distance_type | enum, such as `EUCLIDEAN`, `COSINE`, or `L1` | The type of measurement from which to measure the distance between centroids | `EUCLIDEAN`

### APIs

* [Train]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ml-commons-plugin/api/#train-model)
* [Predict]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ml-commons-plugin/api/#predict)
* [Train and predict]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ml-commons-plugin/api/#train-and-predict)

### Example

The following example uses the Iris Data index to train K-Means synchronously. 

```json
POST /_plugins/_ml/_train/kmeans
{
    "parameters": {
        "centroids": 3,
        "iterations": 10,
        "distance_type": "COSINE"
    },
    "input_query": {
        "_source": ["petal_length_in_cm", "petal_width_in_cm"],
        "size": 10000
    },
    "input_index": [
        "iris_data"
    ]

> }

Reviewer 5: This is an unfair nitpick, but can we indent using spaces instead of tabs? (Most of, if not all) the other code blocks on the docs site are formatted that way, so I want to make sure we're consistent. For reference, lines 91 to 121 go at two spaces with each level of indent.

```

### Limitations

The training process supports multi-threads, but the number of threads should be less than half of the number of CPUs.

> ## Linear Regression

Reviewer 5: Should we do sentence casing here?

* Fixed in time (FIT) RCF: Detects anomalies in time series data.

### Parameters

#### Batch RCF

Parameter | Type   | Description | Default Value
:--- |:--- | :--- | :---
number_of_trees | integer | The number of trees in the forest | 30
sample_size | integer | The same size used by the stream samplers in the forest | 256
output_after | integer | The number of points required by stream samplers before results return | 32
training_data_size | integer | The size of your training data | Dataset size
anomaly_score_threshold | double | The threshold of the anomaly score | 1.0 

#### Fit RCF

Parameter | Type   | Description | Default Value
:--- |:--- | :--- | :---
number_of_trees | integer | The number of trees in the forest | 30
shingle_size | integer | A shingle, or a consecutive sequence of the most recent records | 8
sample_size | integer | The sample size used by stream samplers in the forest | 256
output_after | integer | The number of points required by stream samplers before results return | 32
time_decay | double | The decay factor used by stream samplers in the forest | 0.0001 
anomaly_rate | double | The anomaly rate | 0.005

> time_field | string | (**Required**) The time filed for RCF to use as time series data | N/A

Reviewer 5: Since this one is required, I'm guessing all the others are optional?

Author: Correct

## Anomaly Localization 

The Anomaly Localization algorithm finds subset level-information for aggregate data (for example, aggregated over time) that demonstrates the activity of interest, such as spikes, drops, changes, or anomalies. Localization can be applied in different scenarios, such as data exploration or root cause analysis, to expose the contributors driving the activity of interest in the aggregate data.

### Parameters

Parameter | Type   | Description | Default Value
:--- | :--- | :--- | :---
index_name | String | The data collection to analyze | N/A
attribute_field_names | List<String> | The fields for entity keys | N/A
aggregations | List<AggregationBuilder> | The fields and aggregation for values | N/A
time_field_name | String | The timestamp field | null
start_time | Long | The beginning of the time range | 0 
end_time | Long | The end of the time range | 0
min_time_interval | Long | The minimum time interval/scale for analysis | 0
num_outputs | integer | The maximum number of values from localization/slicing | 0
filter_query | Long | (Optional) Reduces the collection of data for analysis | Optional.empty()

> anomaly_star | QueryBuilder | (Optional) The time after which the data will be analyzed | Optional.empty()

Reviewer 5: Are these all required except for `filter_query` and `anomaly_star`?

Author: Correct.

Reviewer 5: Can we add that in before the table?

Author: Sure.

### Example

> The following example executes Anomaly Localization against an RCA index. The API responds with 10 aggregations and gives the sum of the contribution and base values per aggregation, every

Reviewer 5: It looks like this sentence isn't finished yet?

Author: Fixed
